README.md, before:

# AttentionSmithy

The [Attention Is All You Need](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762) paper completely revolutionized the AI industry. After inspiring such programs like GPT and BERT, it seems all deep learning research began exclusively focusing on the attention mechanism behind transformers. This has created a great deal of research surrounding the topic, spawning hundreds of variations to the original paper meant to enhance the original program or tailor it to new applications. Most of these developments happen in isolation, disconnected from the broader community and incompatible with tools made by other developers. For developers that want to experiment with combining these ideas to fit a new problem, such a disjointed state is frustrating.

AttentionSmithy was designed as a platform that allows for flexible experimentation with the attention mechanism in a variety of applications. This includes the ability to use a multitude of positional embeddings, variations on the attention mechanism, and others.

The baseline code was originally inspired by [The Annotated Transformer](https://nlp.seas.harvard.edu/annotated-transformer/) blog code. We have created examples of transformer models in the following repositories:

- [machine translation](https://github.com/xomicsdatascience/machine-translation), including an neural architecture search (NAS) setup
- [geneformer](https://github.com/xomicsdatascience/geneformer)

## Future Directions
<div align="center">

---
🤝 **Join the conversation!** 🤝

As you read and have ideas, please go to the [Discussions tab](https://github.com/xomicsdatascience/AttentionSmithy/discussions) of this repository and share them with us. We have ideas for future extensions and applications, and would love your input.

---
</div>

## AttentionSmithy Components

Here is a visual depiction of the different components of a transformer model, using Figure 1 from Attention Is All You Need as reference.

![Screenshot 2025-02-10 at 3 53 42 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/29acea66-c865-48fd-9cde-ce55a2be08af)

## AttentionSmithy Numeric Embedding

Here is a visual depiction of where each positional or numeric embedding fits in to the original model. We have implemented 4 popular strategies (sinusoidal, learned, rotary, ALiBi), but would like to expand to more in the future.

![Screenshot 2025-02-10 at 3 49 43 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4a7d1983-6594-4953-8936-2b438de5de82)

## AttentionSmithy Attention Methods

Here is a basic visual of possible attention mechanisms AttentionSmithy has been designed to incorporate **_in future development efforts_**. The provided examples include [Longformer attention](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05150) and [Big Bird attention](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.14062).

![Screenshot 2025-02-10 at 3 45 58 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8dc33378-4b53-456e-8abb-22ab42c7f6c1)

Commit message:

update install instructions in README files

README.md, after:

# AttentionSmithy

The [Attention Is All You Need](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762) paper completely revolutionized the AI industry. After inspiring such programs like GPT and BERT, it seems all deep learning research began exclusively focusing on the attention mechanism behind transformers. This has created a great deal of research surrounding the topic, spawning hundreds of variations to the original paper meant to enhance the original program or tailor it to new applications. Most of these developments happen in isolation, disconnected from the broader community and incompatible with tools made by other developers. For developers that want to experiment with combining these ideas to fit a new problem, such a disjointed state is frustrating.

AttentionSmithy was designed as a platform that allows for flexible experimentation with the attention mechanism in a variety of applications. This includes the ability to use a multitude of positional embeddings, variations on the attention mechanism, and others.

The baseline code was originally inspired by [The Annotated Transformer](https://nlp.seas.harvard.edu/annotated-transformer/) blog code. We have created examples of transformer models in the following repositories:

- [machine translation](https://github.com/xomicsdatascience/machine-translation), including an neural architecture search (NAS) setup
- [geneformer](https://github.com/xomicsdatascience/geneformer)

## Installation

You can install `attention-smithy` using either of the following methods:

### Install from PyPI

The simplest way to install `attention-smithy` is via `pip`:

```sh
pip install attention-smithy
```

### Install from GitHub

Alternatively, you can install the latest version directly from the GitHub repository:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/xomicsdatascience/AttentionSmithy.git
cd AttentionSmithy
pip install -e .
```

This method is recommended if you want to work with the latest source code or contribute to the project.

## Future Directions
<div align="center">

---
🤝 **Join the conversation!** 🤝

As you read and have ideas, please go to the [Discussions tab](https://github.com/xomicsdatascience/AttentionSmithy/discussions) of this repository and share them with us. We have ideas for future extensions and applications, and would love your input.

---
</div>

## AttentionSmithy Components

Here is a visual depiction of the different components of a transformer model, using Figure 1 from Attention Is All You Need as reference.

![Screenshot 2025-02-10 at 3 53 42 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/29acea66-c865-48fd-9cde-ce55a2be08af)

## AttentionSmithy Numeric Embedding

Here is a visual depiction of where each positional or numeric embedding fits in to the original model. We have implemented 4 popular strategies (sinusoidal, learned, rotary, ALiBi), but would like to expand to more in the future.

![Screenshot 2025-02-10 at 3 49 43 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4a7d1983-6594-4953-8936-2b438de5de82)

## AttentionSmithy Attention Methods

Here is a basic visual of possible attention mechanisms AttentionSmithy has been designed to incorporate **_in future development efforts_**. The provided examples include [Longformer attention](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05150) and [Big Bird attention](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.14062).

![Screenshot 2025-02-10 at 3 45 58 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8dc33378-4b53-456e-8abb-22ab42c7f6c1)
